(Techno music)
All right, let's talk about events
in Javascript.
The event object is a gold mine of information
about what happens when an event goes.
So let's actually peel this back a little bit
just so we can get some more practice.
We'll keep the buy button query selector off,
and then everything underneath that,
let's just remove it.
So we have sorta fresh.
Now I wanna loop over every single buy button,
and then attach a handler to it.
So I'll make a new function called handleBuyButtonClick,
console.log, you are buying it!
And then we'll go down here and we'll say
buyButtons.forEach function button,
well, we'll call it buy button just to keep it
the same as we had.
Buy.button and then down here we'll say buy.button,
addEventListener, and listen for a click again,
and we are going to pass it
the handleBuyButtonClick function.
All right, so got it,
let me make this a little bigger so it all goes on one line.
There we go, make this a little smaller.
So we loop over it.
When it runs, we have it.
Good.
So now my question is, is when somebody clicks a button,
how do I get information about what button they're clicking?
'Cause if I have one single function
that handles the clicking of 10 buttons,
how do I know specifically which button they have clicked?
And that information is hidden away in the event object.
The event object is an object that's filled
with all kinds of user useful informations
and methods for working with your event.
To access the event object,
we modify our callback, or our handler, right,
that we have right here.
We modify it to accept a param that is the event.
Remember parameters are placeholders,
so when we define our function,
we can put a parameter here and call it event.
And it doesn't matter what we call it here
as long as it's the first argument of our callback.
And why is that?
Well, when the browser goes ahead and runs
this handleBuyButtonClick function for us,
when somebody clicks it,
it's going to run the function and pass us
a number of arguments.
And the first one is going to be the event object.
And how do I know that?
Well, I don't know, we can go to addEventListener.
First of all, I'm very smart so I know these things.
But how would you know that?
If not, well, you can take a look at addEventListener.
And you see that it takes a couple of things,
a type and a listener.
The listener is a callback function, so the object which
receives a notification.
Blah, blah, blah.
Listener.
See the event listener callback for details
on the callback itself, so that's good.
So this thing right here is what we pass it,
and then the actual call back itself
has event listener callback so I'll click that.
And it says right here,
the callback accepts a single parameter,
so only one parameter,
an object based on the event,
describing the event which has occurred,
and returns nothing.
Okay, cool.
So what we can do here,
is go in here and console.log the event.
Now when we go and click on one of these things,
Boom!
What do we have here?
This thing called a pointer event.
I'm gonna talk to you a little bit more
about pointer events, but essentially,
we have clicks and we have touches,
and we have all these mouse events.
And they're all sorta being consolidated into one
event called a pointer event, which is great.
So we will look at that in the future, but for now,
we're just using clicks because
it's probably the most common,
and they're not going anywhere
and they're probably the easiest to understand.
So if we open up that event here,
you're gonna see all kinds of stuff here.
Is trusted.
That kind of a little boolean that will tell you
if the click was actually coming from someone's mouse,
cause it is possible to fake event clicks.
And you can imagine if you're making a game,
you don't want someone to programmatically click on items.
In my Javascript 30 course we make a whack-a-mole,
and you could just set up a loop to click all the moles,
as soon as they appear,
but the is trusted would be false if you fake a click.
Pointer id width and height and pressure,
oh pressure's kinda cool,
so on newer IPad's and a lot of things,
there's pressure sensitivity.
So what happens you can tell how powerful
somebody is pressing down with their finger,
things like that.
You get the point right?
Power type, mouse.
It tells you the screen x screen y, client x client y,
so these are details as to where in the screen,
and where in the page, here's page x and page y,
the person has clicked.
A bunch of other information about what happens.
What element was clicked on.
All kinds of neat stuff.
The one we are interested in is this thing called the
target, as well as there's something
called a current target.
Which I'll explain the difference between those right now.
So if you go into here.
And you console log the event.target,
now we are to refresh.
Now when you click on the different buttons,
it will show you which button the user has clicked on.
And that's really helpful because we could go in here,
and maybe add data attributes to each of our buttons.
So data-price.
And we could put just a random price.
Do I have a way to randomize?
Let's just do that.
Different amounts of dollars.
And then we can go in here,
and console log the event.target.dataset,
that should give us the dataset.
And then we can get the price.
And that will give us the actual price of the thing,
and we can wrap that entire thing,
that's actually if we check it, it is a type of
in front of it, it's still actually a string.
So we could parseFloat.
Get a true number there.
Which is pretty nifty.
So again, the event contains a whole bunch of information
about what happened in this event.
Including the event type, was it a mouse click, whatever.
And then you have the target,
and then once you have the target,
you can access anything you want about it.
So what I often like to do is do things like this.
I just say const the el, or maybe we'll call it the button,
is equal to event.target.
And then you can just go ahead and say console.log the
button.textContent.
Let's try that, get rid of the other console log.
You see the text that was inside of it?
You can access anything about that specific element.
So that is via the event.target.
Now there's also this other one, if I comment those two out.
If I console.log the event.currentTarget,
what are we gonna get there?
You get the same thing.
So what is the difference between event.target,
and event.currentTarget?
Let's just console log the same thing.
And then let's do a third one,
where we just say is the event.currentTarget
equal to the event.currentTarget?
Are they the same element?
True, so yeah.
True, true, true, true.
So the difference comes in is when you have
elements that are nested inside of the
element that you are listening to.
So if I were then to go and
let's select all of these numbers here.
And let's wrap them in a strong tag.
Boy that got big.
But you see what happened here,
is that now all of my numbers are wrapped in a strong tag.
And what happens if I click on the number?
Is it gonna work?
Am I clicking on the button or
am I clicking on the strong tag?
Boom!
Well, the event.target is the
thing that actually got clicked.
And the event.currentTarget is the
thing that fired the event listener.
So in most cases,
you probably wanna reach for
event.currentTarget instead of event.target.
But it often is helpful to know,
did somebody click on an element inside of me?
Or did they click on the actual element?
So that's pretty common,
because we can go a little bit further and say something
like window.addEventListener.
So our window again is the entire browser.
You can add event listeners to the window.
And you can listen for clicks on the window.
And if that happens,
let's go ahead and console.log, you clicked the window.
So now, I'm just gonna click on the blue.
You clicked on the window.
If I click on this h too.
You also clicked on this window.
But if I click on one of these buttons,
am I clicking on the window?
Or am I clicking on the button?
Let's try it.
This is crazy,
maybe we'll click on the span or the strong tag later.
Whoa!
So what happened,
is that both of those fired.
The window event listener fired,
and the handleBuyButtonClick fired.
So we technically clicked on both of them.
So it is possible to be clicking on multiple things
at a certain time,
and that is what is referred to as propagation.
The propagation is a big word, but essentially,
when I go ahead and click on this strong tag,
what happens is that event bubbles up.
Meaning that I clicked on the strong tag.
But let's inspect it here.
I clicked on the strong tag,
but I also clicked on the button.
Right?
And then I also clicked on the body.
And I also clicked on the html tag.
And I also clicked on the window.
And I also clicked on the google chrome browser.
And I also clicked on my operating system.
You see how that event,
even though I clicked on this tiny little strong tag,
both the browser and the operating system will
register that click, and it will keep bubbling up.
Meaning that I clicked there, clicked there, clicked there,
and then we're listening on the button,
and the button will say great thank you,
but I'm gonna keep allowing that event to keep going up,
in case anybody else higher than me was listening.
So the way that you can prevent that,
is with a method on the event,
that's called stop propagation.
So we can go over here, and write a comment.
Stop this event from bubbling up,
so we'll say event.stopPropagation.
And now, when I do that exact same thing,
You see when I click anywhere it says the window,
but if I click on the button,
we only get the callback for clicking on the button,
and the window listener doesn't fire,
because we sort of stop it dead in it's tracks.
It was like all right hold on, I stopped you there.
And the event was meant to be handled on the button,
the window event listener calm down, don't worry about it.
You can do that.
What's kinda cool about that,
is if we modify this window here,
And we pass it the event,
and we were to console.log the event.target.
Now any time I click on something,
it will show me what it is you're actually clicking on.
So even though I'm listening on the window,
it will tell you what the actual element
that you clicked on, is.
Whether it's a button, or an h2, or another button,
or an image tag, or the body.
I wonder what the difference is,
can I get it to click on a body?
There we go if I click over here,
it fires off on the actual body.
So that's the first sort of method that we learned there.
It's stop propagation.
One other thing,
while we're sort of currently in this head space,
is that events bubble up.
And if we want to stop them from bubbling up,
we run stopPropagation.
But there is a way to sort of flip that,
and I'm gonna explain that right now.
So capture is sort of the opposite.
And I'm just bring up this diagram from the w3,
these are the people that decide on how Javascript works,
and how the browsers work, and how events happen.
And I thought this was great, because
if you have an element very low, like a td,
or in our case it's a button.
And we're listening on the td,
what happens is that when somebody makes a click
right here, we actually click on the document,
then we click on the html, then we click on the body,
and then finally end up clicking on the actual button.
And if there was div's and other things wrapped in there,
they would kinda go through that, right?
So the click kinda goes through every single element
along the way and doesn't do anything, but it's sort of like
keeping a diary, and dear diary today I pass through the
document, then the html, then the body, and then
finally I made my way to the button.
And then maybe even I went one further,
and went to that strong tag that wraps that number there.
Then what happens, is that it starts to bubble up.
Meaning that okay I finally got to the very lowest dom node
that I can find, in our case it's either just gonna be
a raw buy button or a strong tag.
And then begins what is called the bubbling.
So it will sort of bubble on up,
meaning that it will trigger a click on the strong,
it will trigger a click on the button,
it will trigger a click on the body and the html,
and then finally the document.
So that's what it means by bubbling up.
Now, we can sort of stop it as part of this capture phase.
So these events right here, handleBuyButtonClick,
this happens during the bubble phase.
While it's going back up.
But there's an option of when you listen for clicks,
or when you listen for any event,
you can listen during the capture phase.
Meaning that if we wanna listen for a
click on the window first,
and stop it from going any further, we can do that.
And that is with a third argument to addEventListener.
So I have it right here.
This is sometimes a little bit confusing because
addEventListener has three possible different ways to do it.
And usually the first one is the most modern way,
so it used to be that addEventListener took a boolean,
a true or false at the end, that was use capture or not.
But now they have an options object
that they wanna pass through.
And I've never seen this, so don't even worry about that.
So we will be passing an options object,
which inside of it has a couple of options.
One being capture, and a couple other sort of handy ones.
The once one is kinda neat, I'll show you that in a second.
So what we can do is we can go to our window event listener
here and pass it an options object.
So again the first argument is the type,
the second argument is the function that should be run,
and the third argument is now a
new object filled with options.
And I believe the one that we want is called capture.
So we just say capture is equal to true.
I believe it's true.
Boolean indicated dispatched to any listener.
It's either true or false, we'll try it on true,
and we'll come back.
So actually let me just comment that our really quickly
before hand.
So if I click on this button right here,
you'll see that the order at which it happens,
is first it's actually happening on the button level.
So let's modify this a little bit.
First let's say console log you clicked a button.
And then here we have you clicked the window.
And we'll temporarily take this stop propagation off,
cause we want it to trigger both on the button,
and the window.
So now if I click on this button here,
you see at first it says you clicked on the button,
and then it says you clicked on the window.
However, if I switch this to capture true.
I forgot a parenthesis somewhere.
Where did I forget a parenthesis?
That one, function.
There we go, I think that was probably it.
Now if I click it, remember at first it was button,
then it was window, and now if I click it,
first we get window, and then we get button.
Meaning that the order at which these suckers are fired,
goes from top down, rather than bubble up.
So capture down, bubble up.
And we can use the same event.stopPropagation there,
and that will allow us to stop the event from
propagating down instead of bubbling up.
So here we go click it, boom!
You clicked on the window,
and you notice that the handleBuyButtonClick
will never actually be run.
Because we're stopping it at the window level.
I say all of that because that's interesting
and it's good to know,
but probably I've used that three times in my entire career,
this sort of capture here.
That's maybe more of an interview question
about the intricacies of how events work.
Most of my career is spent simply just listening for
clicks on lower level stuff,
and stopping the propagation from handling
when you click on that thing,
so that things that are higher that are also
listening for clicks do not also fire that specific thing.
So a couple of other things I
wanna make sure that we understand about this,
is that event is just a parameter,
meaning that we call it event here,
it's also pretty common to name it something like e.
So if I take every instance of that,
I can call it e.
And I guess I'll take the stop propagation out,
otherwise it'll never fire.
And it still works exactly the same how we had.
So whatever you name it here,
it may be called that inside of the function,
it's just the parameter,
which is a place holder and it makes that
variable available to us scoped to that function.
Let me bring that back, event.
You could call it elephant.
Is it gonna work when it's elephant?
I bet it will.
That's the whole point of this exercise.
Yeah it still works.
So you may name this event here anything that you want,
most likely it's either going to be e or event,
or some weirdos do ev.
Come on, don't do that, that's electric vehicle.
E is probably the most common that I use,
or event is a little bit more explicit.
A few more other things that we want to do here.
Is let's just take a look at this window event listener.
We console log the event to target.
Let's console the event.type,
and let's console log event.bubbles.
These are just kinda a couple more properties that
you'll probably find useful here.
So it will tell us that the target I clicked on the html.
The type, which is the click.
There's lots of other events we're gonna learn about.
And if this event is going to bubble or not,
and that is whether the person has called stop propagation
on it or not.
So if I were then to take a look at the event
and another handler, that would be false.
So one last thing I wanna teach you,
I'm gonna take that propagation off.
Let's do a brand new thing.
Let's make a, let's do an image right here.
So we have an image tag, source is
https://picsum.photos/200 alt nice.
All right there we got it.
And we'll give it a class of photo.
And I'll go here and grab it.
PhotoEl is equal to document.querySelector .photo.
And we can take that photoEl and add an event listener.
Let's use mousemove as the event here.
And we'll grab a function.
And console.log the event.currentTarget.
So now any time e is not, oh because I didn't pass it.
E is not defined, why not?
Because I have not set up the parameter
inside of this function.
Now if I move inside of this thing,
you see it fires millions of times.
Kinda cool thing is you can use console.count here,
and it will tell you how often something has fired.
On that specific thing, which is kinda cool.
So maybe go easy on the mouse move.
There's also mouseenter.
It's only when I leave and then enter again,
that will actually fire on you.
But that's not what I wanna tell you here,
I want to talk about the word this.
So if I were to console log just the keyword this,
what is that gonna be equal to?
I didn't pass it in as a parameter,
can I just use that variable?
That is because I can,
and it is a special word in Javascript.
It is a reserved word in Javascript,
that's a little bit special to us.
So if I were then to hover over top of it,
let's console.log both of these,
see what the difference is here.
It's exactly the same thing.
So if you have a callback function and you wanna reference
the actual element that the event was called against,
this keyword is going to surface that for you.
We're gonna go into the this keyword a little bit more,
but sort of the way that we can remember it for now,
is that the this keyword is always going to be
equal to whatever is to the left of the dot.
So if we call the method called addEventListener
look to the left of the dot,
and that's what this is going to be equal to.
Now, why is there two different ways to do it,
and which way should you use?
Well, the this keyword has a bit of a downside
in that if you change this function to an arrow function,
then the this keyword is no longer scoped to that element,
and that's sort of an upside of arrow functions.
Meaning that, if you don't wanna change what the this
is scoped to, sometimes we have nested functions,
getting a bit ahead of ourselves here,
but sometimes we have nested functions
that we don't wanna change what the
keyword this is scoped to, so you can use an arrow function
to sorta get around that and because of that,
because sometimes we're using regular functions,
sometimes we're using arrow functions,
and you might not necessarily know what this is equal to,
I recommend just not using this.
Not at all, this is great,
but don't use it in event listen or callbacks.
Always use e.currentTarget or e.target instead of this.
So you might see that out there, and that's why,
but don't take my word as gospel,
I'm just one guy on the internet saying this,
but that's my own personal opinion on that.
So, that's enough for Javascript events,
we've got some coming up in the next video,
but I think that's enough for this video.